fix(migration): shorten upgrade guide (#987)
inveniosoftware/docs-invenio-rdm: docs/releases/v14/upgrade-v14.0.md

Reviewer: Would it be possible to move this to Python script too instead?

## Switch from pipenv to uv

*Required for upgrade*: **No, but recommended**. If switch not done, additional steps detailed below are needed.

### Switching to uv

We highly encourage you to switch to [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) from [pipenv](https://pipenv.pypa.io/) for your Python package and project manager, for improvements in speed, ergonomics, and [security](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/concepts/resolution/#dependency-cooldowns). Future releases will only document steps using `uv` commands and may remove support for `pipenv`.

See the dedicated [Pipenv-to-uv migration guide](../uv-upgrade.md), which includes a helper script that converts your `Pipfile` to `pyproject.toml`, updates the `site/` package, and adjusts `.invenio` (`python_package_manager = uv`).

> ### Not switching to uv

Reviewer 2: this is really needed if they want their Dockerfile to work

> *Required for upgrade*: **No, but recommended**. Please have a look to the dedicated [uv-upgrade](../uv-upgrade.md) description.

Author: since we have a dedicated uv upgrade, lets use this. keep the *must* in this file

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
*Required for upgrade*: **No, but recommended**. Please have a look at the dedicated [uv-upgrade](../uv-upgrade.md) section.
```

> *Required for upgrade*: **Yes**. 3.14 is the recommended Python version for InvenioRDM v14.

Reviewer 4: Good you shortened this. The former description was really puzzling: required: yes but if you use 3.11 that's ok, too.

> *Required for upgrade*: **Yes**. 3.14 is the recommended Python version for InvenioRDM v14.

Reviewer 2: **All my comments on the switch to python version**

I feel like we have trouble talking about what's *required* and what is *optional*. For clarity:

1. > *Required for upgrade*: **Yes**. 3.14 is the recommended Python version for InvenioRDM v14.

This sentence is contradictory in English. "recommended" does **not** mean "required". It means "optional" + in the mind of the writer "beneficial" to the reader.

2. I at least, have still not gotten a clear answer on whether we *are* telling upgraders/installers that Python 3.14 *is* required not. And we have to be clear among us maintainers that what we *tell* people and what *is* the actual reality deviates a little. In terms of the code itself, currently 3.14 is not strictly required. The strict requirement, we do have is 3.11+ (from last time I ran a pre-release version of v14 and barring 3.9 because it is not officially supported anymore). But we can *claim* it (and provide enforcement later or point to the statement if people were using a lower version with InvenioRDMv14 that worked for a bit but stopped working after a patch)

Suggestion for now:

```suggestion
*Required for upgrade*: **Yes**. Python 3.9 is not supported anymore. You need to switch to Python 3.11 or higher with 3.14 being our recommended Python version.
```

And the moment we have confirmation that 3.14 should be *stated* as required:

```suggestion
*Required for upgrade*: **Yes**. Python 3.14 is now the required Python version for InvenioRDM v14. Support for lower versions is not maintained moving forward.  
```

3. I would keep the steps below: it caters to upgraders that may not have a deep background on the Python ecosystem like Nico mentioned, the ones that want to just click copy-paste like Max mentioned, and it doesn't go overboard in details (pointing to internet for other approaches) like we all want.

Reviewer: I agree with requiring Python 3.14.
And for the steps below, starting from `The steps below...`, they could be indeed useful.
However, I suggest that we hide them in a section **collapsed** by default, where only the title is visible and clickable to expand it.
The title could mention: `Examples of Python installation procedures`, or something similar.

> *Required for upgrade*: **Yes**. 3.14 being the recommended python version for InvenioRDM v14.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
*Required for upgrade*: **Yes**. 3.14 is the recommended Python version for InvenioRDM v14.
```

> Please use your prefered package manager to install python3.14.

Author: probably we should encourage somewhere that this is a **must** change for InvenioRDM v14. here it looks only like an optional change

> Please use your prefered package manager to install python3.14.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Please use your preferred package manager to install Python 3.14.
```

> If you plan to use `uv`, please have a look at the [uv-upgrade](../uv-upgrade.md) section to install Python 3.14

Reviewer 2: I think upgrading to uv should still be decoupled from upgrading to a specific Python version

Reviewer: Agree, there is a lot to upgrade/change for the user. However, I also agree that splitting the upgrades in clear section should make things more understandable.

Do we require the migration to `uv`, or keep it optional? (ping @slint)

Reviewer 5: Agree as well on decoupling. And I think making it optional would lighten the upgrade guide (and it can be done anyway at any point, regardless of the v14 upgrade).

> If you plan to use `uv` please have a look at the [uv-upgrade](../uv-upgrade.md) description to install python 3.14

Author: probably we have to add a section in `uv-upgrade.md` to explain how to use uv to install python

> If you plan to use `uv` please have a look at the [uv-upgrade](../uv-upgrade.md) description to install python 3.14

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you plan to use `uv`, please have a look at the [uv-upgrade](../uv-upgrade.md) section to install Python 3.14
```

    === "uv"

        ```bash
        uv python install 3.14
        ```

    === "pyenv"

        ```bash
        # With the pyenv tool (https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv)
        pyenv install 3.14
        ```

2.  Change the required Python version in `pyproject.toml` if using `uv` or `Pipfile` if still using `pipenv`.

    === "pyproject.toml"

        ```toml
        # Set this line
        requires-python = "~=3.14.0"
        ```

    === "Pipfile"
*Required for upgrade*: **Yes**. 3.14 is the recommended Python version for InvenioRDM v14.

        ```ini
        [requires]
        # Set this line
        python_version = "3.14"
        ```
Please use your preferred package manager to install Python 3.14.

3.  Change the `FROM` line in your Dockerfile to a base image using Python 3.14
If you plan to use `uv`, please have a look at the [uv-upgrade](../uv-upgrade.md) section to install Python 3.14

    ```Dockerfile
    FROM <Invenio base image with OS of your choice supporting v14 and running Python 3.14>
    ```

    At time of writing such image options are:

>     - For Debian: `FROM ghcr.io/inveniosoftware/invenio:14-debian`

Reviewer 4: Hm, not quite sure, but my feeling is this should stay. I remember when I started using InvenioRDM this was really hard. However, if there is documentation on this elsewhere, perhaps replace this by a link?!

> *Required for upgrade*: **No, but recommended**. Please have a look at the dedicated [pnpm-upgrade](../pnpm-upgrade.md) section.

Reviewer: While the mandatory upgrade steps should be in this page, I think that it is a good idea to move the optional steps to a dedicated page. The other advantage is that we can link them in the next release v15 too.

I would add a **very short sentence** to "attract" the user to migrate.

```suggestion
*Required for upgrade*: **No, but recommended**. The new JavaScript dependencies manager `pnpm` makes installations faster and more secure.

Please have a look at the dedicated [pnpm-upgrade](../pnpm-upgrade.md) section.
```

> *Required for upgrade*: **No, but recommended**. please have a look to the dedicated [pnpm-upgrade](../pnpm-upgrade.md) description.

Author: use a dedicated file for pnpm as for uv. below the same for rspack

> *Required for upgrade*: **No, but recommended**. please have a look to the dedicated [pnpm-upgrade](../pnpm-upgrade.md) description.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
*Required for upgrade*: **No, but recommended**. Please have a look at the dedicated [pnpm-upgrade](../pnpm-upgrade.md) section.
```

> *Required for upgrade*: **No, but recommended**. Please have a look at the dedicated [rspack-upgrade](../rspack-upgrade.md) section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Required for upgrade*: **No, but recommended**. The new assets builder drastically reduces installations time.

Please have a look at the dedicated [rspack-upgrade](../rspack-upgrade.md) section.
```

> *Required for upgrade*: **No, but recommended**. Please have a look to the deciated [rspack-upgrade](../rspack-upgrade.md) description.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
*Required for upgrade*: **No, but recommended**. Please have a look at the dedicated [rspack-upgrade](../rspack-upgrade.md) section.
```

## Switch from pipenv to uv

*Required for upgrade*: **No, but recommended**. Please have a look at the
dedicated [uv-upgrade](../uv-upgrade.md) section.

Note:
If you don't switch, please have a look if your chosen base Docker image has

> `pipenv` still installed.

Reviewer 2: To get the nice formatting and be a teeny more helpful.

```suggestion
!!! note "If keeping pipenv for now"

    If you don't switch, make sure your chosen base Docker image has `pipenv` still installed. The default v14 provided ones don't and you will need to add `RUN pip install pipenv` inside your Dockerfile to install it in that case.  
```

## Switch to supported Python version

*Required for upgrade*: **Yes**. Python 3.14 is now the required
Python version for InvenioRDM v14. Support for lower versions is not

> maintained moving forward.

Reviewer 2: If that's the case, the `version-v14.0.md`'s "Requirements" should also state that (and the one in the inveniosoftware.org blog post).

I will also take it as a sign that we have fully moved to adopt the Python policy and will start implementation steps subsequently.

Reviewer 5: Yes, I confirm here that Python 3.14 is the required version for InvenioRDM v14, and that we can implement/enforce the Python policy.

    - via `pipenv run` or `uv run` in case you are not inside a virtual environment OR
    - environment with executables installed globally

!!! warning "A note on virtual environments and possible data loss"

    If you store your data in `<venv folder>/var/instance/data` you

>     should backup your data befor you go forward.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    should backup your data before you continue.
```

> Use following command to check the location of your data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use the following command to check the location of your data:
```

```bash
invenio files location list
```

### Check your database for the `alembic_version` table

> Check if instance has the `alembic_version` table in your postgresql database.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Check if instance has the `alembic_version` table in your database.
```
PostgreSQL is the only one we support, and not relevant here

```bash

> invenio alembic current

Author: i couldn't test this. The idea is that we use only invenio commands, (easy to copy-paste). this should fail if the table does not exists. The command only shows the revisions, so it does not change anything.

Reviewer 3: With `alembic_version` present and populated:
```
(inveniordm-tuw) mmoser@Alpha ~/rdm/tu-data [master*] $ invenio alembic current
<frozen importlib._bootstrap>:491: RuntimeWarning: The global interpreter lock (GIL) has been enabled to load module 'sqlalchemy.cyextension.collections', which has not declared that it can run safely without the GIL. To override this behavior and keep the GIL disabled (at your own risk), run with PYTHON_GIL=0 or -Xgil=0.
/home/mmoser/rdm/tu-data/.venv/lib/python3.14t/site-packages/fs/__init__.py:4: UserWarning: pkg_resources is deprecated as an API. See https://setuptools.pypa.io/en/latest/pkg_resources.html. The pkg_resources package is slated for removal as early as 2025-11-30. Refrain from using this package or pin to Setuptools<81.
  __import__("pkg_resources").declare_namespace(__name__)  # type: ignore
INFO  [alembic.runtime.migration] Context impl PostgresqlImpl.
INFO  [alembic.runtime.migration] Will assume transactional DDL.
2da9a03b0833 (2e97565eba72, 862037093962) -> 1ba76da94103 (invenio_records_files, default) (head), Create records files tables.
88d1463de5c0 -> a3957490361d (invenio_rdm_records) (head), Remove PIDRelations tables.
12a88921ada2 -> 4e57407b8e4a (invenio_oauth2server, default) (head), Add on delete cascade.
bff1f190b9bd (62efc52773d4) -> aaa265b0afa6 (invenio_oauthclient, default) (head), Move UserIdentity to accounts.
c25ef2c50ffa (eb9743315a9d) -> 41157f1933d6 (invenio_userprofiles) (head), Remove table.
e655021de0de -> 5d25c1981985 (invenio_oaiserver) (head), Add system_created field.
5a5428312b2b (a095bd179f5c) -> b0eaee37b545 (invenio_github) (head), Create github tables.
e40d93d99040 -> 5e02314da32e (invenio_banners) (head), Create invenio-banners db table.
037afe10e9ff -> 6ec5ce377ca3 (invenio_accounts, invenio_access) (head), Create tables for domain list feature.
5c68d45c80f0 -> 72b37bb4119c (invenio_communities, invenio_accounts, invenio_access) (head), Create indeces for bucket_id.
3ba812d80559 -> af2457652217 (invenio_vocabularies) (head), Drop unique constraint from internal id.
1743073617 -> 1743073720 (invenio_audit_logs) (head), Create Audit Logs table.
356496a01197 -> 1f896f6990b8 (invenio_jobs) (head), Update jobs module table names.
9fae3c5404d9 -> 1737449793 (invenio_pages) (head), Add language and new uq.
425b691f768b -> 1746626978 (invenio_collections) (head), Drop ``RDMRecordQuota.user_id`` unique constraint.
1742548610 (de9c14cbb0b2) -> 1742549302 (invenio_checks) (head), Create base tables.
07fb52561c5c -> 428b919be0ea (invenio_records) (head), Alter column from json to jsonb.
a29271fd78f8 -> e172c837b036 (invenio_files_rest) (head), Add indexes.
```

After dropping the table:
```
(inveniordm-tuw) mmoser@Alpha ~/rdm/tu-data [master*] $ invenio alembic current
<frozen importlib._bootstrap>:491: RuntimeWarning: The global interpreter lock (GIL) has been enabled to load module 'sqlalchemy.cyextension.collections', which has not declared that it can run safely without the GIL. To override this behavior and keep the GIL disabled (at your own risk), run with PYTHON_GIL=0 or -Xgil=0.
/home/mmoser/rdm/tu-data/.venv/lib/python3.14t/site-packages/fs/__init__.py:4: UserWarning: pkg_resources is deprecated as an API. See https://setuptools.pypa.io/en/latest/pkg_resources.html. The pkg_resources package is slated for removal as early as 2025-11-30. Refrain from using this package or pin to Setuptools<81.
  __import__("pkg_resources").declare_namespace(__name__)  # type: ignore
INFO  [alembic.runtime.migration] Context impl PostgresqlImpl.
INFO  [alembic.runtime.migration] Will assume transactional DDL.
```

After recreating the table and leaving it empty, same result.

Command exit status 0 in all cases.

Author: i couldn't test this part, because i have a problem locally. ok then we need something else. thanks for testing it

Reviewer: Good idea. This one-liner works.

Without the db table:
```bash
$ uv run invenio shell -c "from invenio_db import db; from sqlalchemy import inspect; print('Success!' if inspect(db.engine).has_table('alembic_version') else 'The DB table does not exist')"
[2026-08-02 17:16:54,909] DEBUG in entrypoint: Loading config for entry point invenio_app_rdm.config
[2026-08-02 17:16:54,999] DEBUG in ext: Flask-DebugToolbar extension not installed.
The DB table does not exist
```

With the table:
```bash
$ uv run invenio shell -c "from invenio_db import db; from sqlalchemy import inspect; print('Success!' if inspect(db.engine).has_table('alembic_version') else 'The DB table does not exist')"
[2026-08-02 17:17:06,318] DEBUG in entrypoint: Loading config for entry point invenio_app_rdm.config
[2026-08-02 17:17:06,410] DEBUG in ext: Flask-DebugToolbar extension not installed.
Success!
```

However, it is indeed ugly. What is we put in a script? (ping @slint for opinions)

Reviewer 5: I think this could be added to the [`prepare_migration_13_0_to_14_0.py` script](https://github.com/inveniosoftware/invenio-app-rdm/blob/master/invenio_app_rdm/upgrade_scripts/prepare_migration_13_0_to_14_0.py), and handle gracefully the case for both the missing and empty table.

Author: no, it can't. `prepare_migration_13_0_to_14_0.py` already lives in the v14 environment but for this special problem here we need the v13 environment.

```

if this throughs an error use which indicates that the table does not exists run

```bash
invenio alembic stamp
```

> to create the `alembic_version` table.

Reviewer 3: ~~~suggestion
If the command's output is very short and contains no lines of the shape `{id} -> {id} ({package_name}) (head), {description}`, that means that the `alembic_versions` table either doesn't exist or is empty.
In this case, create and populate the table with the following command:

```bash
invenio alembic stamp
```
~~~

> NOTE:

Author: i kept a small note to explain why this section exists. We could move the whole section to Troubleshooting, because this is only necessary if the table does not exists, but since this has to be done in the v13 virtual environment it is safer to keep it here.

    - via `pipenv run` or `uv run` in case you are not inside a virtual environment OR
    - environment with executables installed globally

!!! warning "A note on virtual environments and possible data loss"

    If you store your data in `<venv folder>/var/instance/data` you
    should backup your data before you continue.

Use the following command to check the location of your data:

```bash
invenio files location list
```

> 

Reviewer 2: If we do want to go for this even shorter approach:

 
```suggestion
!!! warning "A note on virtual environments and possible data loss"

    If your deposited files are stored in `<venv folder>/var/instance/data`, you should back them up outside this location before you continue. This command checks the location of your deposited files: 
    
    ```bash
    invenio files location list`
    ```

   This is usually only the case in development, as a containerized production deployment will store the deposited files elsewhere. 
```

Reviewer: Nice, the suggestion of @fenekku is very clear.

### Check your database for the `alembic_version` table

> Check if instance has the `alembic_version` table in your database.

Reviewer 2: There has to be some context before the command. If the previous was too long something like:

```suggestion
In order to proceed with the database migration later on, the `alembic_version` table must exist in your database. Run the following to check for its existence: 
```

```bash
invenio alembic current
```

If the command's output is very short and contains no lines of the
shape `{id} -> {id} ({package_name}) (head), {description}`, that
means that the `alembic_versions` table either doesn't exist or is
empty. In this case, create and populate the table with the following

> command:

Reviewer 2: Would keep similar language as before:

```
**If the table exists and contains rows, then you're fine; skip the rest of this step and continue with the next: [Upgrade invenio-cli](#upgrade-invenio-cli).**

If you get `ERROR: relation "alembic_version" does not exist` or no resulting rows, you must create and/or populate that table before proceeding.

On the server, run the following command to create the `alembic_version` table. This command  should **only be run now with InvenioRDM v13** (not with InvenioRDM v14). 
```

Reviewer: This might change depending on the script above

```bash

> invenio alembic stamp

Reviewer 4: Yes, this always worked for me without `pipenv run`.

```

to create the `alembic_version` table.

NOTE:
InvenioRDM v13 contained a race condition that could have prevented the `alembic_version` table from being created. [Alembic](https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/) uses this table to track database schema migrations, and you cannot upgrade to v14 without it.

> On problems please ask for help on our [Discord](https://discord.gg/8qatqBC) server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you encounter issues, please ask for help on our [Discord](https://discord.gg/8qatqBC) server.
```

    - via `pipenv run` or `uv run` in case you are not inside a virtual environment OR
    - environment with executables installed globally

!!! warning "A note on virtual environments and possible data loss"

    If your deposited files are stored in `<venv folder>/var/instance/data`,
    you should back them up outside this location before you continue. This
    command checks the location of your deposited files:

```bash
invenio files location list
```

This is usually only the case in development, as a containerized

> production deployment will store the deposited files elsewhere.

Reviewer 2: This needs to be indented to display correctly *inside* the warning box.

❌ 
<img width="756" height="264" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/58b1a22c-ad28-46bc-a4e0-b9cc7fad2486" />

✔️ 

<img width="756" height="223" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9ea0dd22-5611-4086-8be8-4524ebe8db88" />

### Check your database for the `alembic_version` table

In order to proceed with the database migration later on, the
`alembic_version` table must exist in your database. Run the following
to check for its existence:

```bash

> invenio shell -c "from invenio_db import db; from sqlalchemy import inspect; print('Success!' if inspect(db.engine).has_table('alembic_version') else 'The DB table does not exist')"

Reviewer 2: My understanding of the original problem is that 
1) the table may not exist
2) the table may exist, but be empty. 

If that is right, more is needed to check if the table is empty. Something like

```python
from invenio_db import db;
from sqlalchemy import inspect, text;

with db.engine.connect() as conn:
    result = conn.execute(
        text("SELECT EXISTS (SELECT 1 FROM alembic_version)")
    )
    print("Is table empty: ", result.scalar())
```

shrunk in a one liner or in a script (or the original `select * from alembic_version` 😜 )

Reviewer 3: I believe we have already found a simple Python-based solution for this, via `invenio alembic current`; I remember testing this out and writing up a summary somewhere here (not sure where that went, sorry).
The outcome there was basically: Short output bad, long output good; the exit codes were `0` in all cases.

Ping @utnapischtim

!!! warning "A note on virtual environments and possible data loss"

    If your deposited files are stored in `<venv folder>/var/instance/data`,
    you should back them up outside this location before you continue. This
    command checks the location of your deposited files:

    ```bash
    invenio files location list
    ```

    This is usually only the case in development, as a containerized
    production deployment will store the deposited files elsewhere.

### Check your database for the `alembic_version` table

In order to proceed with the database migration later on, the
`alembic_version` table must exist in your database. Run the following
to check for its existence:

```bash
invenio alembic current
```

If the command's output is very short and contains no lines of the
shape `{id} -> {id} ({package_name}) (head), {description}`, that
means that the `alembic_versions` table either doesn't exist or is
empty.

On the server (production instance), run the following command to
create the `alembic_version` table. This command should
**only be run now with InvenioRDM v13** (not with InvenioRDM v14).

```bash
invenio alembic stamp
```

> NOTE: InvenioRDM v13 contained a race condition that could have

Reviewer 2: We could use special formatting here as with others `!!! note "..."`, or remove `NOTE:` and just leave the rest as a paragraph.

    +++invenio-app-rdm = {extras = [...], version = "~=14.0.0"}
    ```

Install InvenioRDM v14:
### Install InvenioRDM v14:

```bash
invenio-cli install
```

!!! warning "A note on virtual environments and possible data loss"

>     In previous upgrade notes (e.g., from InvenioRDM v12 to v13),

Author: i moved this to the first mentioning of the virtual environment, with a command to check where the data is located.

    where to install the new InvenioRDM version. Doing so carries
    the risk of losing the uploaded files that are stored by default
    in `<venv folder>/var/instance/data`. However, in practice, creating
    a new virtualenv for an upgrade is a relatively niche case.

    Indeed, if you are using containers to run your application
    (and we recommend you do in production), then a new isolated
    environment is created for each Docker image, but your data is persisted
    elsewhere anyway. In this case, you shouldn't have to worry about
    virtualenv data loss.

    And if you are running your application outside of
    a container (typically in development), doing the upgrade in-place
    within your existing virtualenv is also not subject to data loss.

    Only if you do create a new virtualenv (e.g., to upgrade Python version)
    outside of the above scenarios, should you copy the folder with uploaded
    files over to the new `venv` folder in the same location.
    The command `invenio files location list` shows the file upload location.

    As such we don't mention this option anymore.

### Update database schemas and content

> The database migration consists of three steps:

Author: there are not that many steps so creating a TOC is not necessary

    invenio shell $(find $(pipenv --venv)/lib/*/site-packages/invenio_app_rdm -name prepare_migration_13_0_to_14_0.py)
    ```

If it exists with an error please contact us on
[Discord](https://discord.gg/8qatqBC). We have to find an individual

> solution for your problem.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If it exits with an error, please contact us on [Discord](https://discord.gg/8qatqBC), and we will help you find an individual solution for the issue.
```

...

    v13 -> v14 database cleanup completed successfully.

    Please run:

        invenio alembic upgrade

    to finish the database structure migration process. Then continue with the data migration script.
```
If it exists with an error please contact us on
[Discord](https://discord.gg/8qatqBC). We have to find an individual
solution for your problem.

#### Run the schema migration step

Once the pre-migration step has completed successfully, run the Alembic migration to update the database schema:
Run the Alembic migration to update the database schema:

```bash
invenio alembic upgrade
```

> !!! info "Unique constraint violation errors can be solved with database cleanups"

Author: moved to Troubleshooting

Reviewer 2: minor: meh would keep it here in its context

Reviewer: I hope that 99% of the upgrades will not encounter this issue. To me, errors and workaround should go to a Troubleshooting section, where the user can find the exact error that occurred.

> section or please as us on [Discord](https://discord.gg/8qatqBC).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If this exits with errors, please have a look at the [`Troubleshooting`](#troubleshooting) section or contact us on [Discord](https://discord.gg/8qatqBC).
```

    invenio shell $(find $(pipenv --venv)/lib/*/site-packages/invenio_app_rdm -name prepare_migration_13_0_to_14_0.py)
    ```

If it exits with an error, please contact us on
[Discord](https://discord.gg/8qatqBC), and we will help you find an individual
solution for the issue.

#### Run the schema migration step

Run the Alembic migration to update the database schema:

```bash
invenio alembic upgrade
```

If this exits with errors, please have a look to the [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

> section or contact us on [Discord](https://discord.gg/8qatqBC).

Reviewer 4: "... and if you don't find a solution there contact us on ..." or a little bit more friendly 😄 
Perhaps this invites some people not to look in the troubleshooting section and directly ask on discord. But that's surely discussable (I had this experience on my first job: SAP sent an update with a guide. But why read it if you can just call the support? And yes, this was 35 years ago, so the upgrade came  in a package with a lengthy printout).

#### Update OAI-PMH percolator mapping and Job Logs Index

Percolators and job datastreams are not affected by
`invenio index destroy && invenio index init`. They have to be done by

> following script in `invenio shell`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Percolators and job datastreams are not affected by`invenio index destroy && invenio index init`. They have to be updated by running the following script in `invenio shell`.
```

### invenio-cli run --host ... --port ...

> When running `invenio-cli run` (in development) with `--host`/`--port` passed on the command line or host/port defined in `.invenio.private`, it used to be that those values would override `SITE_UI_URL` and `SITE_API_URL`. This is no longer the case in order to allow for listening on a host/port (defined by passed host and port) different than the host/port used to generate the URLs. This is a common situation when listening on 0.0.0.0, but using the fully qualified domain name for URL generation. As such, you need to provide the appropriate `SITE_UI_URL` and `SITE_API_URL` values for your environment which typically means:

Author: we could move this to some other sections in the documentation. maybe there is something in the release notes too.

Reviewer 2: In discussion with @Samk13 we found the context for this change to be crucial, because it wasn't clear to others why and because the line change provided could need to be adapted to `INVENIO_SITE_API_URL = ...` with or without port depending on upgrader's circumstances.

Reviewer: The explanation looks something for maintainers or core developers.
The users don't even know about `.invenio.private`.
Agree that, if needed, it should be move to a section in the "Internals" part of the doc.

Author: i'm not sure what's best here. i will wait for @slint his opinion

Reviewer 2: My understanding was that the explanations were for operators since it bit @Samk13 when running his instance, @mesemus [when running his/testrig](https://discord.com/channels/692989811736182844/1486658528994394143/1516140389080240179), and @wgresshoff [was wondering too below](https://github.com/inveniosoftware/docs-invenio-rdm/pull/987/changes#r3690594050). Other users in Discord also asked about this change, so it's likely relevant to them: e.g., https://discord.com/channels/692989811736182844/1498672074905096303/1500889384822640832 .

Maybe something like:

```md
`invenio-cli run` no longer overrides `SITE_API_URL` and `SITE_UI_URL`. Passing `--host` and `--port` only defines the port and host the development server is listening on. As such, you should change the following lines in `invenio.cfg` for your non-containerized development environment:

```diff
# in invenio.cfg
-SITE_UI_URL = "https://127.0.0.1"
+SITE_UI_URL = "https://127.0.0.1:5000"
-SITE_API_URL = "https://127.0.0.1/api"
+SITE_API_URL = "https://127.0.0.1:5000/api"
```

Reviewer 5: I think we need to add these to the settings docs (to explain what they're for), but also mention it briefly here (as per [your last comment above](https://github.com/inveniosoftware/docs-invenio-rdm/pull/987#discussion_r3705731968)), since they need to be changed for the upgrade.

> Due to changes in `invenio-cli do following:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Due to changes in `invenio-cli`, change the following lines:
```

+SITE_API_URL = "https://127.0.0.1:5000/api"
```

### Overridable IDs in the deposit form

> If you are not overriding any of these components, you do not need to change anything.

Author: state first, if the user has to take any action or not

Reviewer 4: This is really short 😄 But in this case perhaps the second sentence makes some sense: `Else you will need to change the ID(s) in your mapping file to reflect these modifications.`

The full list of ID changes [can be found here](https://github.com/inveniosoftware/invenio-rdm-records/pull/2101/files#diff-ff3c479edefad986d2fe6fe7ead575a46b086e3bbcf0ccc86d85efc4a4c63c79).

### Custom field widget prop names

> Many [custom field widgets](../../operate/customize/metadata/custom_fields/widgets.md) used the `icon` and `description` props, which have now been deprecated and replaced with `labelIcon` and `helpText` respectively. The old names are deprecated and will be removed in a further release, please update to the new names.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Many [custom field widgets](../../operate/customize/metadata/custom_fields/widgets.md) used the `icon` and `description` props, which have now been deprecated and replaced with `labelIcon` and `helpText` respectively. The old names are deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Please update to the new names.
```

### Deprecated GitHub integration

> If you are using github integration please read this section otherwise you can skip it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you are using GitHub integration, please read this section; otherwise, you can skip it.
```

> +SITE_API_URL = "https://127.0.0.1:5000/api"

Reviewer 4: I always had trouble with this: I had a look and can't find anything in the docs about the meaning of `SITE_UI_URL` and `SITE_API_URL` at all. But we set this to hostname and port of of our nginx proxy, so there is no action needed here?

Reviewer 2: Hopefully the new text makes it clearer. We could also add an entry in the https://github.com/inveniosoftware/docs-invenio-rdm/blob/master/docs/reference/settings.md if that would help @wgresshoff . Not a blocker for this or v14 release I think though.

```

### Overridable IDs in the deposit form

If you are not overriding any of these components, you do not need to change anything.

The full list of ID changes [can be found here](https://github.com/inveniosoftware/invenio-rdm-records/pull/2101/files#diff-ff3c479edefad986d2fe6fe7ead575a46b086e3bbcf0ccc86d85efc4a4c63c79).

### Custom field widget prop names

> Many [custom field widgets](../../operate/customize/metadata/custom_fields/widgets.md) used the `icon` and `description` props, which have now been deprecated and replaced with `labelIcon` and `helpText` respectively. The old names are deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Please update to the new names.

Reviewer: The user will need an example here. For example:

If you have developed React components in your instance, or overridden existing UI components, look for any declaration of `icon` or `description` and change them to:

```diff
import { parametrize } from "react-overridable"
import { TitlesField } from "@js/invenio_rdm_records"

export const overriddenComponents = {
  "InvenioRdmRecords.DepositForm.TitlesField": parametrize(
    TitlesField,
    {
        ...
-      description: "Describe your resource in a few words",
+      helpText: "Describe your resource in a few words",
        ...
-      icon: "barcode",
+      labelIcon: "barcode",
        ...
    }
  )
}
```

See [here](https://github.com/inveniosoftware/react-invenio-forms/blob/82d57a9174d016f23395e3896912f6a7c98d684c/src/lib/forms/widgets/text/Input.js#L50) for an example.

### Deprecated GitHub integration

> If you are using Github integration, please read this section; otherwise, you can skip it.

Reviewer 2: This section already states each step is optional.

The [`invenio-github`](https://github.com/inveniosoftware/invenio-github) module has been deprecated and its support will be removed with InvenioRDM v15. Please use [`invenio-vcs`](https://github.com/inveniosoftware/invenio-vcs) instead.

Please see [this detailed guide](https://github.com/inveniosoftware/invenio-vcs/blob/master/docs/upgrading.rst) for more information on how to upgrade.
This is only necessary if your instance was actively using `invenio-github` (with at least one user having connected their GitHub account) **and**
you want to keep the existing data. See also the [documentation on how to configure the new module](../../operate/customize/software_archival.md).

> ## Optional changes

Reviewer 2: The above are all optional too.

    # in `invenio shell`, with the helper loaded (see above)
    run_update_doi_metadata_for_resource_type("publication-thesis")
    ```

## Troubleshooting

### Invenio alembic upgrade could cause problems

> !!! info "Unique constraint violation errors can be solved with database cleanups"
> 
>     In some rare cases, instances have been observed to run into *unique constraint violations* (e.g. `sqlalchemy.exc.IntegrityError: (psycopg2.errors.UniqueViolation) ...`) during the Alembic upgrade.
>     This can happen due to leftover artifacts that were never properly cleaned up, likely due to old bugs.
>     Removing the offending leftover rows from the database will resolve these errors.
> 
>     The necessary steps depend on the concrete situation, but generally what's needed in such cases is to clean up the tables mentioned in the error message.
>     For example, the following error would tell you that you need to delete old entries from the `rdm_records_files` table, and which `(record_id, key)` combination to look out for.
> 
>     ---
> 
>     The following is a real-life example with altered identifiers:
>     ```
>     sqlalchemy.exc.IntegrityError: (psycopg2.errors.UniqueViolation) could not create unique index "uidx_rdm_records_files_record_id_key"
>     DETAIL:  Key (record_id, key)=(0e49c6bb-6772-4b13-ab7f-87fd3fca18ed, research_NMR.zip) is duplicated.
> 
>     [SQL: CREATE UNIQUE INDEX IF NOT EXISTS uidx_rdm_records_files_record_id_key ON rdm_records_files (record_id, key)]
>     ```
> 
>     In this example, we can see that there are two entries for the reported `record_id`, and the older one has had its `object_version_id` set to `null`:
>     ```
>     inveniordm=> SELECT * FROM rdm_records_files WHERE record_id = '0e49c6bb-6772-4b13-ab7f-87fd3fca18ed';
>               created           |          updated           |                  id                  | json | version_id |       key        |              record_id               |          object_version_id
>     ----------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------------+------+------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+--------------------------------------
>      2024-12-03 18:09:12.125274 | 2024-12-03 18:09:12.125283 | 20a5a54a-5c6a-400d-aa3e-5db99323768c | {}   |          1 | research_NMR.zip | 0e49c6bb-6772-4b13-ab7f-87fd3fca18ed |
>      2024-12-03 18:09:33.503182 | 2024-12-03 18:09:33.546971 | 17235935-1e95-4529-b189-82a250113e93 | {}   |          3 | research_NMR.zip | 0e49c6bb-6772-4b13-ab7f-87fd3fca18ed | 2e218ef5-ba92-4fa4-a58a-0c204fc771a1
>     (2 rows)
>     ```
> 
>     It could be resolved with `DELETE FROM rdm_records_files WHERE record_id = '<record-id-with-object_version_id-null>' AND object_version_id IS null`.
> 
>     After that cleanup, `invenio alembic upgrade` went through successfully.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
!!! info "Unique constraint violation errors can be solved with database cleanups"

    In some rare cases, instances have been observed to run into *unique constraint violations* (e.g. `sqlalchemy.exc.IntegrityError: (psycopg2.errors.UniqueViolation) ...`) during the Alembic upgrade.
    This can happen due to leftover artifacts that were never properly cleaned up, likely due to old bugs.
    Removing the offending leftover rows from the database will resolve these errors.

    The necessary steps depend on the concrete situation, but generally what's needed in such cases is to clean up the tables mentioned in the error message.
    For example, the following error would tell you that you need to delete old entries from the `rdm_records_files` table, and which `(record_id, key)` combination to look out for.

    ---

    The following is a real-life example with altered identifiers:
    ```
    sqlalchemy.exc.IntegrityError: (psycopg2.errors.UniqueViolation) could not create unique index "uidx_rdm_records_files_record_id_key"
    DETAIL:  Key (record_id, key)=(imagine-this-were-a-valid-uuid, research_NMR.zip) is duplicated.

    [SQL: CREATE UNIQUE INDEX IF NOT EXISTS uidx_rdm_records_files_record_id_key ON rdm_records_files (record_id, key)]
    ```

    In this example, we can see that there are two entries for the reported `record_id`, and the older one has had its `object_version_id` set to `null`:
    ```
    inveniordm=> SELECT * FROM rdm_records_files WHERE record_id = 'imagine-this-were-a-valid-uuid';
              created           |          updated           |                  id                  | json | version_id |       key        |           record_id            |          object_version_id
    ----------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------------+------+------------+------------------+--------------------------------+--------------------------------------
     2024-12-03 18:09:12.125274 | 2024-12-03 18:09:12.125283 | 20a5a54a-5c6a-400d-aa3e-5db99323768c | {}   |          1 | research_NMR.zip | imagine-this-were-a-valid-uuid |
     2024-12-03 18:09:33.503182 | 2024-12-03 18:09:33.546971 | 17235935-1e95-4529-b189-82a250113e93 | {}   |          3 | research_NMR.zip | imagine-this-were-a-valid-uuid | 2e218ef5-ba92-4fa4-a58a-0c204fc771a1
    (2 rows)
    ```

    The duplication was resolved with `DELETE FROM rdm_records_files WHERE record_id = 'imagine-this-were-a-valid-uuid' AND object_version_id IS null`.

    After that cleanup, `invenio alembic upgrade` went through successfully.
```
